# Lecture 22 --- High speed memory

memory speed is not increasing with processor speed. DRAM access takes ~100s of
cycles. Goal: to create the effect of one _large, fast_ memory by using a
heriarchical memory design. Small fast cache backed up by a larger slower
memory gives impression of a single large and fast memory.

## Memory Hierarchy

```
             512 <1ns
processor -> registers -> L1 -> L2 -> Main memory -> Disk
  1Ghz                 8-64KB 1-2ns 
```

## Memory Hierarchy Issues

Key design points we need to address.

- Block Size (smallest unit that is managed at each level)

- Block placement: direct map (1 locatiion), fully ascociative (any location)

- Block identification: hardware tag matching, OS page table

- Block replacement: Random, Least Reccently used, Not reccently used

- Write stratergy: write-though, write-back

- inclusivity: next level contains all the data found in current level

## Block Placement

fully associative, can place anywhere but have to search full cache to find it
again.  direct mapping `block no % number of blocks in cache` -> fast retrival,
but can cause it to change a lot. Can also use _set associative_ mapping which
involves partiittioining thee cache into sets and then the mod result can go in
any block in the set.

## Cache block identification

- let every block be identified by a name or tag

- store this tag in the memory address

- block tag stored with block data in the cache

## block replacement

- direct map - only one choice

- associative caches

  - random 

  - least recceently used

    - follows principle of temporal locality

    - 1 bit of LRU state per set if 2-way assc

  - not reccently used: select block other than reccenttly used

    - performs better then random and simoler then lru

  - ideal: select the block that will not be used for the longest time, **unrealistic**

