# Lecture 9 --- Pipelined Instruction Execution

## Improving performance through pipelining

Fetch, Decode, Operand Assembly, Execute (function evaluation or address
calulation), Memory Access, Writeback/Completion

|-----+---------------------------------------------------------------|
| stg | purpose                                                       |
|-----+---------------------------------------------------------------|
| FCH | Instruction Fetch                                             |
| DEC | Instruction Decode + fetching values from general purpose reg |
| EXE | Execute arithmetic/logic operations or address computation    |
| MEM | Mem access or branch completion                               |
| WRB | Write back results to general purpose registers               |
|-----+---------------------------------------------------------------|

> Note: Pre WRB is speculative, that is to say it doesn't change the state of
> the processor. At that stage we commit. (stg = stage)

Even memory access is halted until the write back stage to maintain the
speculative nature of the first four steps.

## Instruction Fetch 

1. Read from memory at address given by PC, from either
  - Instruction Closely-coupled Memory (ICCM), scratch pad memory, just there
    to hold instructions. 
  - Instruction Cache (I-cache)

2. Increment PC: `fch_pc_nxt = fch_pc_r + sizeof(instruction)`

## Instruction Decode and operand assembly

- Two source registers (R-Type, S-Type and B-Type)
- Immediate operand (I-Type, S-Type, B-Type, U-Type and J-Type)
- First ALU operand is normally `xreg(rs1)` but may be PC for AUIPC or branch
- Second ALU operand may be `xreg(rs2)` or immediate operand.

3. Passed from fetch stage via `dec_inst_r` register, while we are decoding
   this instruction we will fetch the next one.

4. Instruction decoder provides source register addresses to the register file. If there is an immediate operand it converts it to a 32 bit signed value. At this stage it also produces control signals.

5. `mux` used to select between source register 2 and immediate operand
